# a little psa

I don’t really do discourse these days; 90% of my political energy is in housing activism and that space is blessedly largely discourse-free. But I do like to keep my eye on the left. Here’s a little thing.

Since 2016 there’s been a meteoric rise in self-identified radical lefties using the insults “Strasserite” and “Nazbol.” These are meant to be achingly clever put-downs, a way to call your opponents fascists-in-leftist-clothing. Here’s the important thing for you to know: in actual, informed, traditional socialist discourse, using these insults is not a thing. It’s never been a thing. I’ve been in the radical left my entire life; I was raised inside the radical left. I have been doing socialist discourse my entire life. The insults that get dropped like a comma now are not a commonplace of genuine socialism. They are a commonplace of Tumblr and Twitter and people who have absorbed their politics purely through those media.

Contemporary American socialism is something of a lie, in that it’s made up of people who don’t know what socialism is. When I was younger it was understood that you had an obligation, if you were to style yourself a socialist activist, to do the reading, to do the work. This was all understood to be an intellectual project as well as a political one. In the social media era any semblance of a responsibility to actually know what you’re talking about has fallen away. And when you lose the actual intellectual foundations, what remains are the symbols of in-group signaling. So if you’re someone who became a socialist 15 minutes ago and you see others like you constantly crying Strasserite and Nazbol, you start to do so not because you are deeply informed about either the political firmaments of Nazi ideology or post-Soviet Russian extremist politics, but because other people are doing it too. The social function eats the intellectual functions.

This is, incidentally, why so many self-described socialists are so aggressive in their argumentative posturing: precisely because they do not feel confident. It’s as basic as psychology gets. On social media you will never find anyone who evinces anything less than utter conviction in their politics, entirely because inside they feel no conviction about anything they are saying. Because socialism remains alien to the vast majority of Americans, those who come to it later in life (say 20+) are likely still convincing themselves of their convictions while they try to convince others. Which is fine – unless it represents itself as an undeserved aggression, a peacocking attitude meant to cover up the utter lack of confidence within. (Why is the Chapo subreddit the worst place on the internet? Because it’s literally 100% dudes who discovered socialism via webcomics who strut around like they were part of the Second International.)

It is good to be a beginner. Socialism needs beginners, maybe more than anything else. We need new converts. The thing to do when you’re a beginner, though, is to be a beginner. Act like a beginner. Talk like a beginner. Embrace beginner’s mind. Don’t playact like you’re some grizzled operative if you aren’t, because… why would you? And please, drop Nazbol and Strasserite. All you’re doing is admitting that you got your politics from Twitter.