# rising up to be a CPA

You may recall a few years back that we were witnessing what the progressive media liked to call the “campus uprising.” College students were rising up and taking control of their schools, and fighting for social justice in a way that would shake the world. This was the next great protest movement. This essential story was told countless times, which is always an indication of the media trying to convince itself that something is true.

I said, at the time, that this was misguided and naive. I said that, my civil liberties critiques of these movements entirely aside, the “movement” would be doomed to fail under its own terms, that campuses are unique spaces where students enjoy an idiosyncratic amount of power, that pliant administrators were actually serving the institutions when they seemed to roll over to student demands, that it is next to impossible to maintain organizing structure and consistent activist energy when the entire population of these groups rolls over every four years, that many or most of these activists were in college precisely to join the Professional-Managerial class that perpetuates all that oppression, and that young people’s energy and passion are matched by their fecklessness and inconsistency. I said all that at the time. You can imagine how that went over on Facebook.

Well, today – what of the campus uprising? Sure, there are pockets of protests at many campuses, but no one is bothering to pretend that they are some cohesive national movement, not anymore. The original generation has all graduated and fanned out, I suppose, to Bushwick and Highland Park and Andersonville. I’m sure some of them donate to Bernie and put Black Lives Matter signs in their windows. But there’s no movement; there never was.

The left has no history. We never learn. And soon enough a similar phenomenon to the campus uprising will bubble up, maybe at colleges but maybe someplace else. Will anyone remember this lesson, carry this failure with them for perspective? No. The journalists won’t even follow up on their old stories. The horizon recedes forever before us.