# let me explain all of Star Wars to you heathens

So in the typical way of the internet a sad situation recently played out which had the effect of making all sides look bad. The actor John Boyega, who wonderfully realized the main character in Attack the Block and has played the character of Finn in the three recent Star Wars films, got into it with some fans online, made a sexist remark about his character’s presumed future escapades with the character Rey – presumed because there is literally no textual evidence of any relationship between them, and because the Star Wars universe is utterly sexless – and then went off on the Reylos, the fans who “ship” Rey and Ben Solo. (Reylo = Rey + Ben Solo.) An online pile on began, and as the night follows the day, accusations of racism followed, and it was an ugly mess when people were supposed to be celebrating the new year. As is so often the case the internet created a situation where people fought over nothing and where there were no winners.

It is here where I must pause and say this: the percentage of people who watched The Rise of Skywalker and who are at all aware of this “controversy” is absolutely minuscule. Social media’s distorting effects probably left Boyega and many observers convinced that this was all playing out across the face of Star Wars fans writ large. But most people who go to see these movies do not self-identify as fans in the terms promulgated in fan culture; most people who are fans don’t post online about it; most people who post online about it are probably blissfully unaware that there’s a Reylo movement or an anti-Reylo movement. These are are all tiny worlds that, with the power of digital technologies, are sometimes mistaken for something else.

In any event, why was Boyega so salty? Well, it seems likely to me that he was unhappy because in the trilogy his character ends up, frankly, being sidelined, while the relationship between Ben Solo and Rey becomes more and more central to the story. Rise of Skywalker is an utter mess, a meandering hodge podge of themes and ideas that never remotely cohere, sprinkled with new characters whose existence defies justification and Bill Dee Williams with nothing to do. (Contrast that with The Force Awakens, which is an immensely cynical film but an impeccably well-crafted one too.) But to the degree that TROS is about anything, it’s about Rey and Ben Solo. It’s hard to dispute this point. We learn that Rey and Ben are a “dyad,” linked by the force; they stalk around each other in the film constantly; the death of Leia is dramatized as a direct result of her desire to save Ben; and the climax is not the poorly-realized, frequently baffling Battle of Endor II but the quiet and moving moment when Ben trades his life for Rey’s. Nor can the tedious distraction of the Canto Bight adventures in the prior film be plausibly argued as more compelling than the complex interplay between Rey, Luke, and Ben. (An underappreciated aspect of the widely-reviled Canto Bight section is that it arguably does not move the plot forward at all.) I can understand not liking that the movies played out this way, particularly for fans of Finn. But I have a hard time imagining a convincing denial that the movies became, organically and over time, the story of Rey and Ben.

So that’s gotta kind of suck, for Boyega. I’m sure when he started filming he was expecting to be playing something like the hero role, the box office idol role. And whatever Finn was, he was … not that. Many have mentioned the racial dynamics of the actor of color, presumed at the beginning to be the male lead – remember that Poe was originally slated to die in the first half of TFA – gradually being sidelined in favor of a white couple. Nor can Boyega, or Daisy Ridley, have failed to notice that Adam Driver has gone on to more numerous and higher profile film roles, securing Oscar and Tony nominations and considered a favorite for more awards this coming spring. So yeah, I get why Reylo would be annoying to Boyega.

Here’s the thing about Reylo: it exists. This is a bigger deal than you might think. Reylo exists in a way that FinnRey does not, that PoeRey does not, that R2DRey does not. That’s just a fact; it’s reality. There’s a hardcore passionate fanbase pushing the Rey-Ben romance in the way that there simply is not for other combinations with Rey. (There is also FinnPoe, but Disney was too shook to allow it, to Disney’s eternal shame.) Reylo is a meme. Reylo is organic. That doesn’t mean you have to like it! You can hate Reylo. You can call it toxic or whatever other internet buzzword you like. But you can’t deny that Reylo is a thing. And so the question is, can we dispassionately consider why Reylo is a thing.

Let’s start at the most basic: Reylo is a thing because Ben Solo is a thing, and Ben Solo is a thing because Anakin Skywalker is a thing.

What’s the biggest complaint about The Force Awakens and this trilogy in general? That they simply rehash the original trilogy. And what happens in the original trilogy? Darth Vader is redeemed. Once you recognize that, and you recognize how JJ Abrams works, the whole dynamic seems obvious. This all was basically inevitable. Ben Solo is redeemed because Star Wars is about redemption. That’s not my opinion; that’s reality. Star Wars is about people who have done bad things who are then redeemed. This is true of Lando. It’s true of Han. And it’s true of Darth Vader, the central figure of Star Wars and the laughably obvious inspiration for JJ Abrams’s creation Kylo Ren.

Look, the first six movies are about the redemption of a single character. That’s the story of Phantom Menace to Return of the Jedi! Anakin Skywalker falls and rises. That’s it. That’s what captivated the audience. People like Luke Skywalker. They respect Leia. They admire Han. But the most compelling, most important, most iconic character is Darth Vader. I find this hard to dispute. (Check the merch sales.) After all, the prequel trilogy was made to tell the rest of his story. When they crammed fan service into the otherwise excellent Rogue One, they didn’t choose Han Solo. They chose Darth Vader, because he is the most compelling character.

Why is Darth Vader the most compelling character? Because he’s morally complex.

One of the big complaints about blockbuster film making is that it’s made up of childishly simplistic moral dynamics: heroes are heroes, villains are villains, good is good and bad is bad and in the end, the good guy wins. This is a dramatic problem that afflicts the Marvel universe movies, for example; you don’t get any more moral complexity than Bucky Barnes, and he’s just a misunderstood good guy. And Star Wars would seem to be the worst offender. There’s literally a light side and a dark side, Jedi and Sith, Rebellion and Empire. Everything is all one side or another. This is, to put it mildly, not how reality works. Real life is full of punishing moral ambiguity, a constant inability to ascribe any one side to the good or bad column. Star Wars is not.

And yet as hermetically sealed as these movies are in many ways, some characters have been able to express something a little more complex, and they are, to me, the reasons to enjoy Star Wars. Han is the most obvious candidate, a character who starts out truly neutral and who only gradually comes around thanks to the deeper recesses of goodness within him. And that is dramatically interesting. Same with Lando, and same, more than anything, with Darth Vader. All good or all bad is boring. Change, growth, complexity, those are interesting. Whatever the deficiencies of the prequel trilogy, George Lucas was willing to bet three movies and billions of dollars on the prospect that people would turn out to watch the long, sad fall of a man who they knew would one day be redeemed.

Indeed, this is why Rey is interesting! Rey is interesting precisely because of that dark side edge. She’s a compelling character because there are those brief hints of her darker side, her vision of herself as a Sith, her attraction to the cave on Ahch-To. When she force lightnings that ship and blows it up in TROS, I thought it was one of the best moments in a not-very-good movie. Compare to Luke Skywalker. Look, we all have affection for Luke. But he’s just never the most interesting character in his own movies. He very very briefly touches the dark side in Jedi but is otherwise a stalwary Good Guy, and that’s boring.

In any event: JJ Abrams is sitting there with his legal pad, trying to figure out how to remake the Return of the Jedi in his usual necrophilic way. Who is Ben Solo to him? He’s Darth Vader. And what happens with Darth Vader? He is redeemed, and he is sacrificed. And so Ben must be redeemed, in a way that anti-Reylos hate, and Ben must be sacrificed, in a way that Reylos hate. It’s equal opportunity dissatisfaction. You could imagine a world where JJ Abrams said to himself, “Perhaps I could make something… new,” but this isn’t that world. He preserves all the beats. As soon as he made a new Darth Vader he made a new redemption story. Sorry to break it to the haters.

Back to Jon Boyega. You have this wonderful actor who got a huge role in the biggest franchise there is. And he finds himself sidelined; he finds the female lead French kissing another guy; he finds himself firmly and unarguably secondary to another dude’s character arc. But there was really nothing he could do. The character of Finn (and to a lesser extent Poe) was just criminally underwritten. They simply didn’t give him enough to do. Finn saves Poe, which is cool. He gets maimed by Kylo Ren, which is, uh, whatever. He goes to Canto Bight and participates in the worst Star Wars plotline since Obi Wan was talking to some bad CGI diner owner. And he fights the “Final Order,” I guess? I don’t know why we’re supposed to cheer the destruction of a lot of people who the movie explicitly defines as child soldiers, but fair enough, he does that. Which is great. Good for him. But it’s not interesting. Because, again, there is nothing interesting about a morally static being.

They just didn’t give him anything to do. The most interesting aspects of his character came from his character’s cowardice, when he fled the Star Destroyer and tried to flee the Resistance. I can easily imagine a really cool character arc where Finn gradually grows to be more brave, where the writers give him shit to do and he comes to realize that he’s involved in something bigger than himself. But they didn’t. For whatever reason, Rian Johnson and JJ Abrams and the (I’m presuming) dozens and dozens of other people who worked on scripts decided to make Finn into a generic Nice Guy. And it was all over, then. That was the death of Finn as part of the central arc of the story.

Now contrast that with Ben Solo. He was bad and became good. You know what’s one of the basic human stories, one of the time tested and well-trod tales of the human race? Someone bad became good. If you’re Jewish, or a Christian, or a Muslim, guess what – you believe in redemption. You have to. The basic story of human religion is the story of salvation. Buddha? You can fill this in yourself. A self-centered prince (and Ben Solo was a prince) became the first Bodhisattva. It’s that story that compels us, precisely because human life is so filled with compromise, uncertainty, and doubt. If you don’t like stories about redemption, that’s cool, but you need to recognize that you don’t like Star Wars. (Or, I would argue, the vast majority of human narrative culture.)

Ben Solo was compelling in a way that Finn was not, through no fault of John Boyega’s own. And that’s why things went down this way.

We are living in a time where two unfortunate dynamics are dovetailing together. We have the rise of artistic populism, where every kind of story is now presumed to have the sole purpose of providing escapism, of helping people avoid the depravations of the real world. And we have a progressive political movement that has become so addicted to judgment – the constant sorting of all people into Good and Bad, where every new person declared Bad serves to make the people who consider themselves Good that much more rarefied. Liberals have, to a remarkable degree, given up on forgiveness, which is another way of saying that they have given up on hope. Star Wars is a tale from an earlier era, where redemption was the presumed pursuit of all good people, rather than our own era where the most fiercely guarded right is the right to judge. Star Wars is from an earlier, more romantic, more humane time.

In The Last Jedi Rey says of Darth Vader to Luke, “Yes, the most hated man in the galaxy, but you saw there was conflict inside of him, you believed that he wasn’t gone, that he could be turned.”

At it’s best, that’s Star Wars, that progression from evil to good. If you don’t like it, I just don’t think these movies are for you.

Now go and spread my gospel.

